БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

УДК 665.642 

ИССЛЕДОВАНИЕ КОРПОРАТИВНЫХ МУЛЬТИСЕРВИСНЫХ СЕТЕЙ 
●●●●●● 
RESEARCH CORPORATE MULTISERVICE NETWORKS 

Бахтияров Исрафил Натик 
докторант кафедры  
управления и системной инженерии, 
Азербайджанский государственный  
университет нефти и промышленности 

Bakhtiyarov Israfil Natik 
Doctorated study  
of Department Control  
and System Engineering, 
Azerbaijan state oil and industry university  

Аннотация.  Рассмотрена  структурная  схема  функционирова-
ния исследуемой модели корпоративных мультисервисных се-
тей  связи  с  использованием  сетевых  элементов  программно-
конфигурируемых сетей. Получены формулы для расчета пока-
зателей  вероятностно-временных  характеристик  корпоратив-
ных мультисервисных сетей связи. 

Annotation. A structural diagram of the func-
tioning  is investigated  model corporate  multi-
service  communication  networks  using  net-
work  elements  software-  defined  networks  is 
considered.  Formulas  are  obtained for calcu-
lating  the  indicators  of  the  probability-time 
characteristics corporate multiservice commu-
nication networks. 

Ключевые  слова:  мультимедийные  услуги,  корпоративные 
мультисервисные  сети  связи,  контроллер,  коммутатор,  про-
граммно-конфигурируемая сеть. 

Keywords:  multimedia  services,  corporate 
multiservice  communication  networks,  con-
troller, switch, software-defined network. 

C 

reation of new and improvement of existing corporate multiservice communication networks is of 
great importance for the development of the telecommunication infrastructure of management sys-
tems of industrial companies, organizations, departments and government bodies. As a rule, for such commu-
nication networks it is created on the basis of renting a network, channel and information resource from the 
operators of the Unified Telecommunication Network [1, 2]. Based on the systematic and technical analysis, it 
was found that among the above-mentioned digital and network technologies, an important place is occupied 
by the technology of software-configurable networks (PCN), providing the provision of the Triple Play services 
and Bandwidth on Demand services, which requires the provision of maximum bandwidth, average latency 
and bandwidth on demand of users. 

In [4, 5, 6], the principles of building corporate communications networks using the architectural con-
cepts of next-generation networks based on circuit switching are discussed in detail. Our study is dedicated to 
solving the problem formulated above – the study and assessment of the probability-time characteristics of 
corporate multiservice communication networks based on the architectural concept of future FN networks us-
ing  PKS  technology.  Based  on  the  study  of  corporate  multiservice  communication  networks  based  on  FN 
architectural  concepts,  it  was  established  in  [5,  7] that  the  main  and  most  popular  multimedia  services  are 
access  to  telecommunication  networks,  the  Internet, IP-telephony  (Internet  Protocol),  a  local  area  network, 
and a global network in which it is necessary to analyze in more detail the network technology of software-
configured networks. 

It should be noted that in software-configured networks, as you know, the main fundamental feature is 
the separation of functions that are responsible for data transfer, and the removal of control applications to a 
separate server – controller. To describe the useful and service traffic passing between the network switches 
and the controllers of the PKS, an analysis of their statistical characteristics and the selection of an adequate 
MM random process are required. 

In the study of the functioning efficiency of corporate multiservice communication networks using the 
PKS technology, an important task arises of developing a mathematical model (MM), based on simplifications 
in the description of the studied concept of a single infocommunication space. 

On  the  basis  of  the  PKS  MM  network,  explicit  analytical  expressions  are  obtained  for  the  stationary 
probability  distribution  of  the  QS  corresponding  to  the  simplified  model  of  corporate  multiservice  networks 
based on FN. 

Литература 

1.  Wang K.-H. Optimal control of a removable and non-reliable server in an M/M/1 queueing system with expo-

nential startup time // Mathematical Methods of Operations Research. – 2003. – Vol. 58. – P. 29–39. 

2.  Ibrаhimov B.G., Humbatov R.T., Ibrahimov R.F. Analysis performance multiservice telecommunication networks 

with using architectural concept future networks // T-Comm. – 2018. – Vol. 12. – № 12. – Р. 84–88. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

3.  Башарин Г.П., Самуйлов К.Е., Яркина Н.В., Гудкова И.А. Новый этап развития математической теории 

телетрафика // Автоматика и телемеханика. – 2009. – № 12. – C. 16–28. 

4.  Малиновский С.Т., Беленькая М.Н., Спиридонов А.А. Метод повышения производительности транспорт-

ного протокола ТСР в глобальных корпоративных сетях передачи данных // Т-СОММ. – 2010. – № 7. – C. 39–42. 

5.  Пшеничников А.П. Теория телетрафика. – М. : Горячая линия – Телеком, 2017.– 212 с. 
6.  Треногин Н.Г., Соколов Д.Е. Модели трафика корпоративных сетей на основе устойчивых фрактальных 

процессов // Вестник НИИ СУВПТ, Сборник научных трудов. – Красноярск, 2003. – Вып. 14. – С. 76–80.  

7.  Семенова О.В., Дудин А.Н. Система массового обслуживания M/M/N с управляемым режимом обслужи-

вания и катастрофическими сбоями // Автоматика и вычислительная техника. – 2007. – № 6. – C. 72–80. 

References 

1. Wang K.-H. Optimal control of a removable and non-reliable server in an M/M/1 queuing system with 

exponential startup time // Mathematical Methods of Operations Research. – 2003. – Vol. 58. – P. 29–39. 

2. Ibráhimov B.G., Humbatov R.T., Ibrahimov R.F. Analysis performance multiservice telecommunication 

networks with using architectural concept future networks // T-Comm. 2018. – Vol. 12. – № 12. – P. 84–88. 

3. Basharin G.P., Samuylov K.E., Yarkina N.V., Gudkova I.A. A new stage in the development of the 

mathematical theory of teletraffic // Automation and Telemechanics. – 2009. – № 12. – P. 16–28. 

4. Malinovsky S.T., Belenkaya M.N., Spiridonov A.A. A method for increasing the performance of the 

transport protocol TCP in global corporate data networks // T-COMM. – 2010. – № 7. – P. 39–42. 
5. Pshenichnikov A.P. Theory of teletraffic. – M. : Hot line. Telecom, 2017. – 212 p. 
6. Trenogin N.G., Sokolov D.E. Corporate network traffic models based on stable fractal processes // 

Vestnik NII SUVPT, Collection of scientific works. – Krasnoyarsk, 2003. – Issue 14. – P. 76–80. 

7. Semenova O.V., Dudin A.N. Queuing system M/M/N with controlled service mode and catastrophic 

failures // Automation and Computer Engineering. – 2007. – № 6. – P. 72–80. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
