БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

УДК  

РАЗРАБОТКА МЕТОДИКИ ПЕРЕСЧЕТА ЗАБОЙНОГО ДАВЛЕНИЯ  
С ГЛУБИНЫ МАНОМЕТРА ДО ОПОРНОЙ ГЛУБИНЫ 
●●●●●● 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF BOTTOMHOLE PRESSURE RECALCULATION METHOD 
FROM PRESSURE GAUGE TO THE REFERENCE DEPTH 

Юртов Михаил Петрович 
студент магистрант, 
Российский университет нефти  
и газа имени И.М. Губкина 

Метелкина Наталья Валерьевна 
начальник отдела технологии  
высоковязких и тяжелых нефтей, 
ООО «ЛУКОЙЛ-Инжиниринг» 

Аладьев Антон Павлович 
студент магистрант, 
Российский университет нефти  
и газа имени И.М. Губкина  

Yurtov Mikhail Petrovich 
Graduate Student, 
I.M. Gubkin Russian University of Oil and Gas 

Metelkina Natalya Valerievna 
Head of High-Vacuum  
and Heavy Oil Technology Department, 
LUKOIL-Engineering Ltd. 

Aladyev Anton Pavlovich 
Graduate Student, 
I.M. Gubkin Russian University of Oil and Gas  

Аннотация. Основным и наиболее надежным способом оценки 
забойного давления является его непосредственное измерение 
с помощью манометра на необходимой глубине. Часто, в соот-
ветствии с условиями эксплуатации скважины, датчик не может 
быть размещен на необходимой глубине. В этом случае давле-
ние на опорной глубине пересчитывается из аналитических за-
висимостей на основе измеренного давления. 

Annotation. The main and most reliable way 
to  assess  bottomhole  pressure  is  to  directly 
measure  it  with  a  pressure  gauge  at  the  re-
quired  depth. Often,  according to the operat-
ing conditions of the well, the gauge cannot be 
placed at the required depth. In this case, the 
pressure at the reference depth is recalculated 
from  the  analytical  dependencies  based  on 
the measured pressure. 

Ключевые слова: забойное давление, манометр, остановлен-
ная скважина, обводненность, продуктивная скважина. 

Keywords: bottomhole pressure, gauge setting 
depth, shut in well, water cut, production well. 

INTRODUCTION 
The dynamic of reservoir pressure change is the main parameter of oil and gas field development mon-
itoring. And the main method of determining this parameter is a well test. In the process of well test the reservoir 
pressure (bottom hole pressure in shut in well) is measured at the gauge depth.  

There are various methods for recalculating bottomhole pressure, but they all have their own features 
and shortcomings [1]. Taking into account all the features of multiphase flow in the wellbore requires either a 
complex analytical approach or specialized software.  

In this work the simplified semi-empirical methodology is considered for bottomhole pressure recalcula-
tion from gauge to the reference depth in two options: for production wells and shut in wells with a watercut 
more than 1 percent. This work is based on actual well tests which were conducted in Iraq. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 
For the production wells a feature of the calculation by this technique is the assumption that the density 
of the mixture in the wellbore does not change in depth. The density of the mixture depends on the water cut 
and the water source (Fig. 1). 

In a shut well, fluid redistribution occurs along the wellbore. For the correct determination of the phase 
separation depth at each well test, the inflow profile should be determined with a phase separation (Figure 2). 
Based  on  the  proposed  method,  the  bottomhole  pressures  (BHP)  were  recalculated  to  a  reference 
depth. For recalculation, all well tests in wells with a water cut of more than 1 % were selected. The results are 
presented (Figure 3, Figure 4). 

As can be seen from Figure 3, the maximum bottomhole pressure difference for production wells, recal-
culated  by  different  methods  (12.3  bar),  corresponds  to  the  maximum  water  cut  value.  With  a  decrease  in 
water  cut,  the  difference  value  decreases.  The  dependence  on  water  cut  is  non-linear,  since  the  pressure 
gauge setting depth and the density of water from different sources, influences the value of the recalculated 
BHP. With a water cut of less than 7 %, the difference between recalculated BHP is less than 1 bar. 

444 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

Figure 1 – The recalculation of BHP in the production well 

Figure 2 – The recalculatiuon of BHP in the shut in well 

Figure 3 – The difference between recalculated BHP in working wells using different methods 

445 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

Figure 4 – The difference between recalculated BHP in shut wells using different methods 

According to Figure 4, the maximum difference between recalculated BHP in shut wells is 2 bar. In this 
case,  the  difference  between  recalculated  BHP  in  shut  wells  depends  on  from  both  the  water  cut  and  top 
perforated interval. The difference between the pressures recalculated by different methods decreases with 
similar values of water cut in the case when the top perforated interval is located closer to the reference depth. 
As can be seen (Figure 5), for wells with a difference between the reference depth and the pressure 
gauge setting depth more than 400 m, the difference between recalculated BHP using different methods is a 
function of the water cut [2]. 

Figure 5 – Dependence of the difference between recalculated BHP in production wells on water cut 

446 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

RESULTS 
The correctness of the proposed method can be checked by comparing the recalculated BHP (bottom-
hole pressure) with the actual measurements at a depth close to the reference. Simultaneous measurements 
of pressure at a gauge setting depth and at depth below top perforated intervals were carried out in wells X, 
Y, and Z. 

The results of the comparison of recalculate BHP for bottomhole depth for oil density and for mixture 

density are presented (Table 1). 

Table 1 – The results of the bottomhole pressure recalculation in the production wells 

Well 

X 

Y 

Z 

Actual BHP,  
bara 
153.7 

154.6 

156.3 

Recalculated BHP 
(oil density), 
bara 
149.6 

∆BHP 
(oil density), 
bara 
4.1 

Recalculated BHP  
(mixture density),  
bara 
151.3 

∆BHP 
(mix density), 
bara 
2.4 

154.3 

154.2 

0.4 

2.1 

154.4 

155.0 

0.2 

1.3 

CONCLUSION 
1.  The value of recalculated BHP obtained using the proposed method by the density of the mixture is 

well correlated with well tests in the wells X, Y, Z.  

2.  The difference between recalculated bottomhole pressure in shut wells depends on from both the 

water cut and top perforated interval. 

3.  For further verification of the proposed method, it is necessary to conduct well tests with simultane-
ous measurement at the pressure gauge setting depth and at the bottomhole. Such well tests are possible at 
wells with decentralized (lateral) location of electrical submersible. It is recommended to conduct well tests on 
all wells that meet this requirement. 

Литература / References 

1.  Hasan A.R. and Kabir C.S. Predicting Multiphase Flow Behavior in a Deviated Well // SPEPE. – Nov. 1988 –  

P. 474–482. 

2.  Executive summary in accordance with purchase order № Q3_2019, LLC «LUKOIL-Engineering». – M., 2019. 

447 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
