УДК 598.48.54 

РАЗРАБОТКА ЭФФЕКТИВНОЙ ПРИСАДКИ НА БАЗЕ МЕСТНОГО СЫРЬЯ 
●●●●● 
DEVELOPMENT EFFICIENT ADDITIVE ON BASE LOCAL RESOURCE  

Камалова Дилноза Мирфазиловна 
старший преподаватель кафедры «Геодезия и кадастр», 
Ташкентский архитектурно строительный институт, 
Ташкент, Республика Узбекистан 

Исламова Зульфия Камилджановна 
старший преподаватель кафедры «Геодезия и кадастр», 
Ташкентский архитектурно строительный институт, 
Ташкент, Республика Узбекистан 

Рахимбабаева Мархамат Шакировна  
старший преподаватель кафедры «Геодезия и кадастр», 
Ташкентский архитектурно строительный институт, 
Ташкент, Республика Узбекистан  

Kamalova Dilnoza Mirfazilovna 
Senior lecturer of the department  
«Geodeziyz and kadastr», 
Tashkent institute of architecture  
and civil engineering, 
Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan 

Islamova Zulfiya Kamiljanovna 
Senior lecturer of the department  
«Geodeziyz and kadastr», 
Tashkent institute of architecture  
and civil engineering, 
Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan 

Rakhimbabaeva Markhamat Shakirovna 
Senior lecturer of the department  
«Geodeziyz and kadastr», 
Tashkent institute of architecture  
and civil engineering, 
Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan 

Аннотация.  В  работе  показана  возможность  синтеза  новых 
смазочных  материалов  для  смазывания  на  базе  локального 
плавания  до  ресурса.  Показана  возможность  практического 
применения полимерной добавки. 

Annotation. Possibility of the syntheses new 
lubrications  material  are  shown  In  work  to 
lubrificant  on  base  local  swam  to  resource. 
Possibility  of  the  practical  application  poly-
meric additive are Shown. 

Ключевые  слова:  добавка,  полимер,  смазывающее  веще-
ство,  поликонденсация,  депрессор,  сырье,  ресурсы,  коллоид-
ная характеристика, молекулярно-массовое распределение. 

lubrificant, 
Keywords:  additive,  polymer, 
polycondensationя,  depressor,  raw  material 
recurs,  colloidal  characteristic,  molecular-
mass distribution. 

T 

he Conditions of the work lubricating oil in modern engine and mechanism become so tense that 
oil  butters  in  clean  type  regardless  of  quality  source  cheese  and  methods  of its  conversion  can 

not provide their normal work [1].  

Entering the functional groups or chemical element in different organic join, used as additive to butter, 
allows to raise efficiency of the action of these join toward improvement that or other characteristic lubricating 
oil. So studies in the field of syntheses additive, containing in its composition different functional groups, has 
important importance  with  stand  point  of  the  reception  multifunctional  additive  to  butter  [2].  For the  reason 
syntheses  depressor  additive  us  were  organized  studies  on  introduction  to  molecule  olygomers  α,γ-
dichlorgydringlycerin phosphor containing fragment and development to technologies of the reception phos-
phor containing additive on base α,γ-dichlorgydringlycerin with phosphor containing join, got on base phos-
phorits of a Central Kyzylkums [3].  

reaction  polycondensation  with  digaloidalkil,  contain 

From literature known that study of the regularities joint polycondensation galoid containing monomer 
and phosphor containing join attracts all greater attention of the researchers due to possibility of the creation 
on their base olygomers with given characteristic. On the other hand, study of the kinetics and mechanism of 
the interaction digaloids with said join will vastly increase our knowledge’s in the field of inconvertible poly-
condensationing  processes,  and  we  consider  that  these  studies  promote,  filling  available  in  this  area  gap. 
The Last and shoos the necessaries to research the behavior phosphor containing join, after careful peelings 
in 
(α,  γ-dichlorgydringlycerin)  to  achieve the  hithemoleculling  an  additive  on  base  of  the  products  these  reac-
tion. The Process polycondensation phosphor containing component with α,γ-dichlorgydringlycerin conduct-
ed  as  en  masse,  so  and  in  ambience  of  the  different  organic  solvents.  The  Regularities  polycondensation 
phosphor  containing  component  (FCC)  with  α,  γ-dichlorgydringlycerin  studied  at  ekvimoling  correlations 
source component in interval of the temperature 333-373 К for 300 minutes. To flow process polycondensa-
tion checked potensometric titring acid groups. Since change brought to viscosity and separation of the sodi-
um chloride are a direct result of the described processes, that quantitative estimation two these factor and 
have served the method of the determination to velocities polycondensation DHG and FCC. 

its  structure 

in 

two  negative  centers                                 

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As can be seen from got given dependency amount selected as a result polycondensation DHG and 
FCC sodium chloride from length of the reactions has S-figurative type. At period from 60 before 150 mines 
occurs the intensive separation NaCI, characterizing high velocity to reactions polycondensationи. Approxi-
mately through  160–245  mines  (depending  on  the  temperature)  separation  NaCI  stops,  reaching  65–80  % 
from theoretical. Such a regularity is confirmed at description of the process polycondensation DHG:FCC on 
change brought viscosity of the system and on result of importance’s of the acid number of the products pol-
ycondensation. 

In studied interval of the temperature (343-363К) – a most velocity to reactions  exists under 363  К. Pro-
cessing experimental data by method least square has shown that kinetic curves to the best advantage in coordi-
nate from R = 0,8 before completion of the reactions. This  has  allowed doing the conclusion that in all studied 
events kinetic given are better described by equation of the second order. On the grounds of warm-up dependen-
cy of the process polycondensation is determined its energy to activations, which forms 31,9 кdj/moll. It Is Installed 
that modified designed additive of lubrificant not subject to sinereris, is herewith revealed that fillers (for instance, 
graphite) also raise the colloidal stability of lubricant. The Chemical stability of lubrificant defined the oxidation an 
them in bomb under pressure of the oxygen (8 atm) under 100 oС or bore the in special ditch in thermostats under 
raised  to  temperature.  About  stabilities  judged  on  amount  of  the  absorbed  oxygen,  at  time  and  on  growth  acid 
number lubrificant. 

It Is Installed that introduction designed additive in composition of lubrificant brings about reduction of wa-

ter, in consequence of gidrofiling compositions that also reduces the corrosion of the metallic parts mechanism.  

Viscosity of plastic lubricant measured on automatic capillary viscozimetr, since she defines the possi-
bility of their leading-in in mechanisms of the start the machines, as well as loss to powers on friction. Partic-
ularly, it is important to know viscosity of lubrificant under low temperature. Under constant temperature vis-
cosity it changes depending on velocities of the deformation of lubrificant. Usually in standard on lubrificant is 
specified greatly possible importance of viscosity under one or another low temperature and velocities to de-
formation. The Limit to toughness on shifts this minimum voltage of the shift, causing destruction of the struc-
tured framework of plastic lubrificant and transitions it to viscous current. This factor measured on capillary 
plastometr-K2.  

For the reason production more qualitative goods oils on Alty-Aryks production Fergana oil referenirer 
plant was perfected lubrificant production technology, modified designed additive. Work on production modi-
fied oils and solider was realized in chemical laboratory (ChL-1) Alty-Aryks production FROP. 

It is installed that physic-chemical features modified additive oils hang from structure hydrocarbon, fall-
ing into their composition. They are determined by method IR-spectrum, which results are indicative of that 
that there are unsaturated paraffin join in composition of the diesel oil that explains low density and viscosity 
given diesel oil. 

Us are revealed that on factor of density, cinematic and dynamic viscosity modified fuel be up to quali-
ty  GOST.  It  Is  Installed  that  when  functioning  in  mechanical  transmissions  (in  gearbox,  in  leading  bridge) 
modified designed additive industrial butters show all quality, inherent transmissions butter, answering mod-
ern requirements. 

Together  with  that,  they  provide  also  work  micromechanics  box  of  the  issues  without  vibration,  slip-
pages  and  sticking  disk  tractions.  The  Last, is  an  essential  advantage  phosphor-containing  additive  before 
industrial additive of the mark «Ferad» and EFO. Thereby, we are designed new polyphunktional phospho-
polyols,  which  can  be  applying  as  additives  to  oils  material.  Since,  applicable  at  present  in  industry  of  the 
additive wedding from-beyond the frontier, they hard obtenium, toxic and roads. 

Литература: 

1.  Черножуков С.Н. Добавки и смазывающие вещества. – M. : Химия, 1999. 
2.  Спицын А.Д., Санин И.К. Присадочные материалы. – М. : Химия, 1998. 
3.   Махманов Д.М. : Автореф. диссе. … канд. техн. наук. – Ташкент : ТашХТИ, 2011. – 23 с. 

References: 

1.  Chernozhukov S.N. Additives and lubricants. – M. : Chemistry, 1999. 
2.  Spitsyn A.D., Sanin I.K. Additive materials. – M. : Chemistry, 1998. 
3.   Makhmanov D.M. : Autoref.... Cand. of Sciences. – Tashkent : Tashkhti, 2011. – 23 р. 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
