БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 622.692.4  

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

ОСОБЕННОСТИ ОЦЕНКИ ВЗАИМОДЕЙСТВИЯ ДРЕЙФУЮЩИХ  
ЛЕДОВЫХ ОБРАЗОВАНИЙ С МОРСКИМИ ТРУБОПРОВОДАМИ 
––––––– 
ICE FEATURES-OFFSHORE PIPELINE INTERACTION  
ASSESSMENT CONSIDERATIONS 

Силина Ирина Георгиевна 
аспирант кафедры транспорта углеводородных ресурсов, 
Тюменский индустриальный университет 

Silina Irina Georgievna 
Post-graduate student of hydrocarbon  
resources transportation chair, 
Tyumen Industrial University 

Иванов Вадим Андреевич 
доктор технических наук,  
профессор кафедры транспорта углеводородных ресурсов, 
Тюменский индустриальный университет 

Ivanov Vadim Andreevich 
Doctor of Engineering,  
Professor of hydrocarbon resources  
transportation chair, 
Tyumen Industrial University 

Аннотация.  В  статье  представлен  анализ  факторов,  опреде-
ляющих  особенности  функционирования  морских  трубопрово-
дов  в  арктических  условиях.  Рассмотрены  подходы  к  опреде-
лению оптимальной величины заглубления морских трубопро-
водов.  Приведены  рекомендации  по  проектированию  трубо-
проводов в данных условиях. 

Ключевые слова: морские трубопроводы, ледовая экзарация, 
борозды  выпахивания,  глубина  заложения,  ледовые  образо-
вания. 

Annotation. The article presents the analysis 
of  the  factors  determining  the  peculiarities  of 
operation  of  offshore  pipelines  in  the  Arctic 
conditions.  Approaches 
the 
optimal  offshore  pipeline  burial  depth  are 
considered.  The  recommendations  on  pipe-
lines  design  in  the  given  conditions  are  de-
scribed. 

to  determine 

Keywords:  marine  pipelines, 
gouges, burial depth, ice formations. 

ice  scour, 

A 

ccording  to  the  USGS  Circum-Arctic  Resource  Appraisal  (CARA)  mean  estimates,  oil  and  gas 
reserves in the Arctic region are about 1,7 trillion cubic meters of natural gas, 44 billion barrels of 
natural  gas  liquids,  and  90  billion  barrels  of  crude  oil.  Currently,  the  development  of  offshore  oil  and  gas 
fields is impossible without pipeline systems construction. Offshore pipelines are designed not only for deliv-
ering hydrocarbons to the consumer and shipping products to tankers and barges but also for infield and in-
terfiled transportation of raw materials. [5] In particular, offshore pipelines are  used to collect well products 
from subsea wellhead complexes to platforms and transport hydrocarbons from platforms to onshore produc-
tion facilities. 

The Arctic is a challenging area with prevalent: 
–   harsh climate conditions; 
–   harsh working conditions; 
–   remote areas. 
That factors  leads  to  limited  time for construction  activities  and  challenges  associated  with  pipelines 
operation and maintenance, leak detection and emergency response. The Arctic also has extremely sensi-
tive ecosystems and unique natural phenomena (such as strudel scour, ice gouging) that significantly affect 
the pipeline systems life cycle. Permafrost, seasonal pack ice, and ice ridges present substantial challenges 
for offshore pipeline systems, especially in shelf areas. 

Additional static and dynamic loads from waves, currents and ice formations can be noted among the op-
erating  conditions  of  the  offshore  pipelines. A  particularly  great  danger  for  the  pipelines  laid  in  freezing  seas  is 
posed by drifting ice features and icebergs, the keels of which reach the seabed and displace soil mass, forming 
such  forms  of  sea  relief  as  ice  gouges  and  pits.  [2]  Having  rather  large  kinetic  energy  and  strength,  drifting ice 
formations are able to leave gouges with a depth of about 2–2.5 m. [1] In this case, the issue of ensuring a high 
degree of reliability of offshore pipelines throughout their entire service life, including maintaining the design load-
carrying capacity of pipeline walls regardless of external influences, becomes extremely important. 

Russian  and  foreign  operation  practice  of  sea  pipelines  in  freezing  seas  is  extremely  limited,  which 
leads  to  the  absence  of  the  unified  standard  base  on  pipelines  design,  construction  and  operation  in  such 
conditions. 

Existing standards do not give strong recommendations to assess the pipeline loading conditions induced 

by ice gouging. The standards also do not offer any criteria or acceptable limits for offshore pipeline design. 

In engineering practice, the pipeline trenching providing its safe operation is considered the most rea-
sonable  protection  method  against  ice  gouging.  The  main  challenge  is  to  determine  the  safe  and  cost-

158 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

effective  pipeline  burial  depth  along  the  whole  route.  The  design  depth  should  provide  sufficient  clearance 
below the gouge for the pipeline to withstand the bending stress to a level that the design engineer considers 
acceptable; the shear soil deformations should be taken into account. 

Safe and cost-effective pipeline burial depth should be determined according to the physical behavior 
of ice feature-soil-pipeline interaction process. In a natural environment, ice gouging scenarios are affected 
by various factors, among which three main groups can be identified: hydrometeorological conditions (wind, 
waves, currents, temperature, etc.), ice regime of the region and seabed soil characteristics. 

The first two groups of factors determine the processes of ice features formation and drifting in the wa-

ter area:  

–   the geometric parameters and distribution of strength characteristics of the ice feature body;  
–   formation mechanisms and separation of pressure ridges [3];  
–   the initial kinetic energy of the ice formation, as well as the depth where the most intensive gouging 

takes place, etc. 

The underwater pipelines are also affected by coastal activities in the coastal and shelf zones. In this 
regard, if the factor is not gouging depths may be underestimated, which may lay to an underestimation of 
the required pipeline burial depth. [4]  

Seabed soil properties determine the amount of energy required for the ice formation to left gouges of 
certain depths and lengths on the seafloor. The topography of the seabed also influences the possible gouge 
depth and geometry, creating additional resistance to the ice keel movement.  

The  design  pipeline  burial  depth  should  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  seabed  mapping  data  (geo-
physical, bathymetric), i.e., taking into account the existing local topography along with the gouges charac-
teristics and frequency.  

Geophysical and bathymetric surveys of the seabed is carried out using: 
–   single- or multiple-beam echo sounders; 
–   side-scans sonars; 
–   sub-bottom profilers.  
The  information  obtained  through  the  surveys  includes  gouge  depth,  width,  length,  orientation  and 
density. Repetitive seabed mapping helps to distinguish young gouges from old ones and to determine goug-
ing frequency. 

The chosen assessment approach for pipeline burial depth determination may be a probabilistic one, 
for which seabed mapping data is collected periodically over a given number of years. As an additional ap-
proach  for  the  determination  of  possible  gouge  characteristics  a  computer  modeling  may  be  used.  In  this 
case, the simulation of the most probable scenarios of ice features (with pre-set parameters) drifting can be 
carried out; the interplay of driven forces must be considered. 

Determination of the clearance between the gouge and the pipe depends on the acceptable pipeline 
response  to  withstand  some  bending.  However,  when  determining  pipeline  response,  pipe  properties  and 
design features should be taken into account. 

Thus, pipeline burial depth along the right-of-way should be set determined based on climate and en-
vironmental conditions of the considered region, as well as on the accepted “ice-seabed-pipeline” interaction 
model. For this purpose, it is necessary to determine the maximum gouges depths (excluding “extreme” val-
ues), estimate factors potentially involved in the interaction and, based on the sensitivity analysis, investigate 
how the set of factors affects the load transferred to the buried pipeline. 

Offshore pipelines in the Arctic region must be designed to account for ice gouging; for that purpose: 
–   the  pipeline  burial  depth  should  be  determined  by  the  maximum  expected  gouges  depths  in  the 

considered area; 

–   certain  engineering  techniques  have  to  be  implemented  to  avoid  interaction  of  pipelines  with  ice 

keels [5]; 

–   ice gouging phenomenon should be investigated through complex methods, including field surveys, 

physical testing or numerical simulations.  

As  it  was  mentioned,  there  are  several  approaches  to  generate  information  on  scouring  phenomena 
and gain understanding of seabed response to ice gouging. These approaches can be divided into two fol-
lowing categories: 

–   real events observation which involve performing extensive site surveys, identifying gouges charac-

teristics and frequency. 

–   artificial  simulations  that  can  bridge  the  knowledge  gaps  and  provide  better  understanding  of                           

the complexity of «ice gouging-seabed-pipeline» interaction process. 

All abovementioned indicate the necessity of further investigation in the area. Predicting the maximum 
possible gouge depth as  well as  soil deformation is connected  with determination of the minimum required 
burial depth and ensuring pipe integrity. To adequately estimate the induced loads and the optimal pipeline 
burial  depth,  additional  research  on  ice  gouging  phenomenon  is  essential. The  coupled  soil-pipe  response 
when investigating displacement and the local buckling effect of the pipe is also in need of further studies. 

159 

 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

Литература: 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

1.  Вершинин С.А. Воздействие ледовых образований на подводные объекты / С.А. Вершинин, П.А. Трус-

ков, П.А. Лиферов. – М. : Русская книга, 2007. – 195 с. 

2.  Либина  Н.В.  Экзарационные  явления  на  восточном  арктическом  шельфе  России  /  Н.В.  Либина,                     

С.Л. Никифоров // Вестник МГТУ. – 2018. – Т. 21. – № 1. – С. 139–149. 

3.  Миронов Е.У. Формирование гряд торосов в прибрежной части Карского моря и их морфометрические 
характеристики / Е.У. Миронов, В.С. Порубаев // Современные проблемы науки и образования. – 2012. – № 4. – 
С. 331. 

4.  Наумов  А.К.  Морфометрические  характеристики  ледяных  образований  Баренцева  моря 

:                             

дис. … канд. геогр. наук : 25.00.28 / Алексей Кирович Наумов; Аркт. и антаркт. науч.-исслед. ин-т. – СПб., 2010. – 
175 с. 

5.  Сурков Г.А. Научно-методические основы расчета нагрузок от ледяных торосов на морские нефтегазо-
промысловые  сооружения  :  дис.  …  д-ра  техн.  наук:  25.00.18,  05.23.07 /  Геннадий  Александрович  Сурков.  –  М., 
2001. – 383 с. 

References: 

1.  Vershinin S.A. Ice features effect on underwater facilities / S.A. Vershinin, P.A. Truskov, P.A. Liferov. – M. : Russian 

Book, 2007. – 195 p. 

2.  Libina N.V. Ice gouging effects on the eastern Arctic shelf of Russia / N.V. Libina, S.L. Nikiforov // MSTU Jour-

nal. – 2018. – V. 21. – № 1. – P. 139–149. 

3.  Mironov E.U. Ice pressure ridge shaping in the Kara Sea intertidal zone ant their morphometric parameters / 

E.U. Mironov, V.S. Porubaev // Actual prob-lems of the science and education. – 2012. – № 4. –  P. 331. 

4.  Naumov A.K. Morphometric parameters of ice features in the Barents Sea : diss. … cand. geogr. sciences : 

25.00.28 / Alexey Kirovich Naumov; Arct. and Antarct. research. un-ty. – SPb., 2010. – 175 p. 

5.  Surkov G.A. Scientific and methodic basics of calculation of stress values transferring from ice features to ma-
rine oil and gas production facilities : dis. … d-r techn. sciences : 25.00.18, 05.23.07 / Gennadiy Alexandrovich Surkov. – 
M., 2001. – 383 p. 

160 

 
 
 
 
 
 
