БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 159.955.5 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

К ВОПРОСУ РАЗВИТИЯ ТВОРЧЕСКОГО МЫШЛЕНИЯ 
●●●●●● 
ISSUES ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF CREATIVE THINKING 

Туйчиев Адхам Тухтабаевич 
преподаватель английского языка,  
начальник отдела  
международного сотрудничества  
и научных исследований,  
Институт повышения квалификации  
и переподготовки работников  
народного образования  
adham.tuychiev@gmail.com 

Tuychiev Adham Tukhtabaevich 
English teacher, Head of the Department  
of  International  Cooperation  and  Research, 
Institute for Upgrading and Retraining  
of Public Education Employees 
adham.tuychiev@gmail.com 

Аннотация. В данной статье рассматриваются важные психо-
лого-педагогические  закономерности  условий,  влияющих  на 
творческий  процесс,  качества,  препятствующих  развитию 
творческого  мышления  и  пути  развития  творческого  мышле-
ния. Автор приходит к выводу, что развитие творческого мыш-
ления возможно только посредством включения обучающихся 
в творческую познавательную деятельность. 

Annotation.  The  article  discusses  the  im-
portant  psychological  and  pedagogical  laws 
of conditions that  affect the creative process, 
qualities  that  impede  the  development  of 
creative  thinking  and  the  ways  of  develop-
ment  of  creative  thinking.  The  author  con-
cludes that the development of creative think-
ing  is  possible  only  through  the  inclusion  of 
students in creative cognitive activity. 

Ключевые  слова:  творческое  мышление,  креативность,  чер-
ты мышления, гибкость, решение задач, изложение. 

Keywords:  creative  thinking,  creativity,  fea-
tures  of  thinking,  flexibility,  problem  solving, 
setting out. 

T 

hinking is the most complex cognitive process, which is the highest form of reflection of the sur-
rounding world by brain. A person cannot receive answers to many cognitive questions through 
direct interaction with the outside world. In this case, the tasks are solved indirectly by means of mental ac-
tions or processes of thinking. 

Let’s note the distinguishing features of thinking first: 
1)  creatively processes existing ideas and creates new ones,  which in the given moment do not yet 

exist either in the subject or in reality itself; 

2)  is able to reflect not only individual objects, phenomena and properties, but also the existing rela-

tionships between them, and in a generalized form. 

3)  indirectly reflects the surrounding world. 
For example, the presence of infection in the body is judged by an increase in body temperature. Peo-

ple resort to indirect knowledge in the following cases: 

a)  if direct cognition is impossible, because our analyzers are imperfect or completely absent, for ex-

ample, a person does not perceive ultrasound, infrared radiation, x-rays; 

b)  if direct knowledge is impossible in real time, for example, archaeological and paleontological ex-

cavations; 

c)  if direct knowledge is impractical, for example, it makes no  sense to go outside to find out the air 
temperature, it is more rational to look at the readings of the thermometer outside the window or listen to the 
weather forecast; 

d)  actively functions in the conditions of a problem situation; 
e)  expands the boundaries of knowledge; thanks to intelligence, a man overcame gravity, descended 

to the bottom of the ocean, etc.; 

f)   allows you to predict the onset of certain events, for example, a solar eclipse. 
So, thinking allows you to indirectly, abstractly and generally to know the surrounding reality. 
Thinking  is  classified  on  various  grounds.  We  will  name  the  most  commonly  used  classifications  of 

types of thinking. 

The question of the psychological nature of creativity is still open. Currently, this question can only be 

partially answered. 

Guilford J. believed that creative thinking is characterized by a predominance of four features: 
1)  originality, unusual ideas expressed, a pronounced desire for intellectual novelty. According to the 

researcher, a creative person always has his own view of everything that happens; 

2)  semantic flexibility, i.e. the ability to see an object from a new angle, to discover the possibility of its 

new use, to expand its functional application in practice; 

166 

 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

3)  figurative adaptive flexibility, that is, the ability to change the perception of the object in such a way 

as to see its new side, hidden from observation; 

4)  semantic, spontaneous flexibility, that is, the ability to produce various ideas in an uncertain situa-

tion, in particular so that does not contain guidelines for these ideas. 

Conditions affecting the creative process: 
1)  successful experience in the past can inhibit finding new, more rational ways of solving problems; 
2)  if finding the right solution was given with great difficulty, then a return to this method in the future 

will be more likely, even if it is not sufficiently effective; 

3)  the stereotypic thinking that arises due to the first two conditions can be overcome if the decision is 

postponed for a while and then return to it with the firm intention to look for new ways; 

4)  frequent failures hinder the creative process, a motive for avoiding failures may form when a per-

son is afraid to start something new because of possible disappointments; 

5)  for the successful flow of the creative process, proper motivation and an appropriate emotional atti-

tude are necessary. 

Finding the optimal motivation and the optimal level of emotional arousal is an individual process. 
Qualities that impede the development of creative thinking: 
1)  a tendency to conformism, that is, to the desire to follow someone else’s opinion, refusing their own 

opinion, fear of being a “black sheep”; 

2)  the fear of seeming overly critical and even aggressive in rejecting the opinions of others; 
3)  fear of revenge from the one whose opinion is denied; 
4)  an overestimated assessment of the own achievements, ideas; 
5)  high personal anxiety; 
6)  excessive  criticality  of  thinking,  which  does  not  allow  focusing  on  the  development  of  productive 

ideas, since all forces go to criticize other opinions. 

The  concept  of  “creativity” is  closely  related  to  the  concept  of  «intelligence»,  which means  a  person 

has common mental abilities, so he successfully copes with a variety of tasks. 

The presence of creative thinking is an important indicator of human intelligence, for his formation it is 

necessary to adhere to a certain line of education. 

The following ways develop thinking process: 
1)  it  is  necessary  to  follow  the  principle:  “Do  you  want  to  be  smart,  learn  to  ask  reasonably,  listen 

carefully, calmly answer and stop talking when there is nothing more to say”; 

2)  thinking is developed in the process of mastering knowledge. As the sources of knowledge can be: 

books, media, school, etc. 

3)  any  kind  of  thinking  begins  with  a  question,  which  means  that  you  should  learn  the  ability to  ask 

questions about each event with which you are dealing; 

4)  it is useful to develop the ability to notice new things in the familiar, to see an object or phenome-

non from different angles; 

5)  you should train the flexibility of the mind, which contributes to the game of quick wits, solving puz-

zles and logical puzzles; 

6)  an important technique that develops thinking is a comparison of related concepts; 
7)  you  should  remember  the  inextricable  link  between  thinking  and  speech,  which  means  that  for  a 

better understanding you need to try to present the material to another person; 

8)  the  use  of  written  language  also  contributes  to  the  development  of  thinking;  therefore,  writing  an 

essay and keeping a diary is useful; 

9)  discussions are useful for the development of thinking, a free presentation of what has been read, 

and the solution of paradoxical problems. 

So, the development of thinking is possible if a person wants to master new knowledge, the desire to 

achieve creative and professional heights. 

References 

1.  Guilford, J. P. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
2.  Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
3.  Wainzwaig P. (1990). Ten precepts of the creative person. Moscow.  
4.  Bono E. (2000). An independent way of thinking. Moscow.  
5.  Cropley, A. J. (2001). Creativity in education and learning. London: Kogan Page. 
6.  Weisberg, R. W. (2006). Creativity: Understanding innovation in problem solving, science, invention, and the 

arts. New Jersey: Wiley. 

167 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
