УДК 678.762.3 

ИССЛЕДОВАНИЕ МАГНИТНЫХ ПОЛИМЕРНЫХ КОМПОЗИТНЫХ СОРБЕНТОВ 
●●●●● 
THE RESEARCH OF MAGNETIC POLYMERIC COMPOSITE SORBENTS 

Мустафаева Рена Эльдаровна 
кандидат химических наук,  
старший научный сотрудник, 
научно-исследовательская лаборатория  
«Новые химические материалы и технологии», 
Азербайджанский Государственный Университет  
Нефти и Промышленности 

Mustafayeva Rena Eldar 
Leading Research fellow, chem. Sciences, 
Scientific-research laboratory  
«New chemical materials and technologies», 
University of Oil and Industry, 
Republic of Azerbaijan  

Аннотация.  Разработаны  синтетические  подходы  к  созданию 
магнитоактивных полимеров, способных сорбировать субстра-
ты  различной  природы  (газы,  алканы,  спирты).  Показано,  что 
магнитные  характеристики  таких  систем  определяются  маг-
нитными  свойствами  полиядерных  фрагментов  в  их  составе, 
что является важным свойством для направленного получения 
композиционных  материалов  с  заданными  магнитными  свой-
ствами.  Полученные  соединения  могут  найти  применение  как 
основа  создания  новых  магнитных  материалов,  магнитных 
сорбентов. 

Annotation.  Synthetic  approaches  to  the 
creation  of  magnetically  active  polymers 
capable  of  sorption  substrates  of  various 
natures (gases, alkanes, alcohols) have been 
developed.  It  is  shown  that  the  magnetic 
characteristics  of  such  systems  are  deter-
mined  by  the  magnetic  properties  of  polynu-
clear fragments in their composition, which is 
an important property for the directed produc-
tion  of  composite  materials  with  specified 
magnetic  properties.  The  resulting  com-
pounds  can  be  used  as  the  basis  for  the 
creation of new magnetic materials, magnetic 
sorbents. 

Ключевые  слова:  магнитореологические  материалы,  ферро-
магнитные  наполнители,  магнитные  материалы,  магнитные 
сорбенты. 

Keywords:  magnetorheological  materials, 
ferromagnetic 
fillers,  magnetic  materials, 
magnetic sorbents. 

M 

agnetic  polymer  composites  are  of  great  interest  in  terms  of  fundamental  research.  Magne-
torheological materials refer to composite materials consisting of ferro- or ferrimagnetic particles 
having  their  own  magnetic  moment,  placed  in  a  paro-  or  diamagnetic  medium  with  rheological  properties. 
The rheological properties of such materials are altered by the interaction of the magnetic filling particles with 
the external magnetic field. Para- or diamagnetic medium with rheological properties. The mechanical, elec-
trical  and magnetic  properties  of magnetic  composites  can  be  controlled  by  a magnetic field,  which  allows 
them to be classified as multifunctional materials. The search for and development of such magnetic elasto-
mer materials is relevant. We have studied the technology of making composite materials based on polymer 
and a mixture of ferromagnetic fillers. [1] 

As you know, composites are many component materials consisting of two or more components with a 
clear between phase boundaries them, while the properties of the composites can not be determined by the 
properties  of  each  of  the  phases  separately,  but  only  taking  into  account  their  interaction.  Such  materials, 
which are actually a matrix with fillers included in it, differ in the types of matrices (organic, inorganic, poly-
mer, metal) and fillers. [2] Obtaining new effective sorbents is of paramount importance for solving environ-
mental  problems  associated  with  the  increased  content  of  a  number  of  toxic  compounds  in  natural  waters 
used in urban water supply systems, as well as in the oil industry, as it is known, oil production is accompa-
nied by the inevitable release of hydrocarbons into the environment. The largest losses of oil and petroleum 
products are associated with their sea transportation from production areas. Despite the fact that oil pipelines 
are  a  cheaper  and  more  environmentally  friendly  method  of  oil  delivery,  tankers  carry  out  the  bulk  of  the 
transportation. Emergencies on board tankers, draining of flushing and ballast water worsen the environmen-
tal situation, cause significant damage to the environment. Oil spills also occur during accidents on offshore 
platforms  from  which  wells  are  drilled  and  oil  is  produced  offshore.  To  clean  the  surface  of  water  from  oil 
films, it is necessary to use magnetic composite sorbents based on polymer matrices, which have increased 
buoyancy, mechanical strength and high absorption capacity in relation to oil products and oil. It should be 
noted that today polymer-inorganic sorbents have become the objects of a wide variety of sorption studies. 

The  purpose  of  the  work  is  to  develop  effective  ways  to  obtain  magnetically  active  polymer  sorbent 
composites, which combine the presence of magnetic centers  with the presence of pores suitable for sorp-
tion of certain substrates, and to establish factors affecting their structure, magnetic and sorption characteris-
tics. 

183 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When  dispersing  crystals  of  magnetite  Fe3O4  and  maghemite  γ-Fe2O3  in  porous  polymer  spherical 
granules, non-magnetic sorbents become magnetically active and react to a magnetic field. The use of such 
materials  in  sorption  processes  makes  it  possible  to  replace  the  complex  procedure  for  separating  spent 
sorbent  from  solution  with  a  simple  magnetic  separation  method.  Magnetic  polymer  granules  can  be  ob-
tained by depositing iron oxides directly in a polymer matrix that limits the growth of magnetic particles, as a 
result, their size becomes smaller than in the absence of polymer, and magnetic properties are improved. 

At the same time, hybrid materials must satisfy the following two conditions, firstly, so that the imposed 
magnetic activity does not impair the sorption properties of polymer materials, and secondly, that the compo-
sites remain magnetized for many sorption-desorption cycles. 

Results are obtained on the effect of a magnetic field on the process of producing magnetic compo-
sites.  It  is  established  that  the  combination  of  magnetic  and  elastic  properties  leads  to  the  appearance  in 
these types of composite materials of a unique ability of the material to reversibly change the size and vis-
cous elastic properties in an external magnetic field. In a uniform magnetic field, such materials have a mag-
netically  controlled  elastic modulus,  and  strong  magnetostriction  is  observed  in  inhomogeneous  fields.  For 
the  synthesis  of  magnetic  elastomers  used  silicone  polymer  matrix  SIEL.  Silicone  oligomer  with  vinyl  and 
hydride  groups  at  100-1500С  interacts  in  the  presence  of  a  platinum  catalyst.  Magnetic  particles  are  intro-
duced into the matrix: Fe – 2 µm, Fe3O4 – 0.2-0.5 µm. 

In a magnetic field, the polymer macromolecules are oriented, and in the presence of magnetic parti-
cles,  the  elastomers  are  structured.  To  achieve  high  magnetic  characteristics  of magnetic  elastomers,  it  is 
known that it is necessary to introduce the maximum possible number of magnetic fillers. However, at a very 
high  value  of  the  degree  of  filling,  the  material  loses  cohesive  strength.  At  various  degrees  of  filling  with 
magnetic particles of 3, 5, and 12 volume % Fe, structured elastomers with various elastic magnetostrictive 
characteristics  were  obtained.  There  is  a  different viscoelastic  behavior  of  the  polymer  when  exposed  to  a 
uniform magnetic field during various deformation processes. The residual deformation in a uniform magnet-
ic field depends on the type of magnetic particles and increases with an increase in their content. 

Synthetic approaches to the creation of magnetically active polymers capable of sorption substrates of 
various natures (gases, alkanes, alcohols) have been developed. It is shown that the magnetic characteris-
tics of such systems are determined by the magnetic properties of polynuclear fragments in their composi-
tion, which is an important property for the directed production of composite materials with specified magnet-
ic properties. The resulting compounds can be used as the basis for the creation of new magnetic materials, 
magnetic sorbents. 

The highest value of the elastic modulus is observed for structured compositions with parallel oriented 
strains and magnetic field intensities. It has been revealed that with the use of a magnetically sensitive poly-
mer  in  the  process  of  sequential  pumping  as  a  liquid  separator  it  gives  the  greatest  economic  effect.  De-
pending on the relief of the pipelines and the properties of the relief of the pipeline and the properties of the 
pumped liquids, the necessary magnetic field strength is selected using the results obtained. 

Литература: 

1.   Воробьев  Ю.Л.,  Акимов  В.А.,  Соколов  Ю.И.  Предотвращение  и  реагирование  на  аварийные  разливы 

нефти и нефтепродуктов. – М., 2005. – 368 с. 

2.   Леон-Гонсалес  М.Е.,  Перес-Аррибас  Л.В.  Химически  моди-фицированные  полимерные  сорбенты  для 

предварительной концентрации образца // Журнал Хроматографии. – 2000. – Т. 902. – С. 3–16. 

References: 

1.   Vorobyov Yu.L., Akimov V.A., Sokolov Yu.I. Prevention and response to emergency oil and oil product spills. – 

M., 2005. – 368 p. 

2.   León-González  M.E.,  Pérez-Arribas  L.V.  Chemically  modified  polymeric  sorbents  for  sample  preconcentration  //                  

J. Chromatogr. – 2000. – V. 902. – Р. 3–16. 

184 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
