БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

DEALING WITH DIFFICULT STUDENTS 

Shikhiyeva Sevda 
Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry University  

Annotation.  All  the  instructors  have  prior  experience  in  teaching,  therefore  they  are  quite  motivated  and  enthusiastic  to  learn  more 
about  the  strategies  and  ways  of  dealing  with  difficult students  and  involving  them  to  the  active  learning  process.  According  to  Knowles, 
Holton  and Swanson (2015)  adult  education is a process through which learners become  aware  of significant experience. Recognition  of 
significance  leads  to  evaluation.  Meanings  accompany  experience  when  we  know  what  is  happening  and  what  importance  the  event  in-
cludes for our personalities. The prior experience with difficult students should be considered. Some of the learners are self-directed while 
the others expect clear explanation form the leader. The problem is faced everywhere and the ways of solving it is of great interest. 
Keywords: motivation, challenging, learning process, exploring methods, drastic shift  

Introduction  

1. 

The teaching profession would agree that dealing with behaviorally challenging students is one 
of the most dreaded part of their job. Challenging behaviors can significantly change the climate of a class-
room  and  present  barriers  to  learning,  particularly  for  the  student  demonstrating  the  behavior  (Moreno  & 
Bullock,  2015).According  to  Moreno  and  Bullock  (2015)  educators  with  little  professional  experience  often 
have few measures and skills to assist students struggling with academics or demonstrating challenging be-
haviors. Therefore, success in dealing with behaviorally challenging students is possible if appropriate train-
ing is provided and the right strategies are used. We will address some of those strategies while focusing on two 
key areas: 1. academic and non-academic reasons why disputes occur between teacher and students: 2. strate-
gies for engaging students and reducing volatile incidences.  

2.  Literary review  

    2.1   Creating disputes  

First, the absence of desire can be one of the reasons that creates disputes. Brunt (J. & Brunt, 2010) 
noted that managing students who don’t have desire appear to prefer to be any place other than the class-
room. While it creates dispute in K-12 education, in university teachers think that, they are adults and should 
be responsible for their own motivation. An article from Focus on Effectiveness reported that, «students’ be-
liefs  about  their  ability  to  learn  are  shaped  by  messages  and  experiences  at  home,  at  school,  and  in  the 
larger society» (Toppin & Pullens, 2015). Next comes, the sign of disengagement which is more evident in 
traditional learning  process  specifically  among millennial learners.  Therefore,  these  students  have  become 
confident with their technological tools such as mobile phones, tablets, computers…etc. and are easily feel-
ing  weary  and  impatient  because  they  are  unoccupied  with  the  current  activity  and  restricted  from  using 
those tools. According to Toppin and Pullen (2015) when the instructors unwilling to incorporate such tools 
into  their  pedagogy  and  restrict  students  from  using  them,  they  create  an  environment for  disengagement. 
Turning to non-academic reasons financial pressures, family commitments, along with life’s other demands 
can also make it difficult for the students to sustain a high level of engagement and can create some chal-
lenges (Toppin & Pullens, 2015). 

This means difficult students come in all forms with a variety of attitudes and teachers deal with these 
students  on  a  daily  basis.  The  specific  behaviors  that  are  generally  accepted  as  annoying,  disruptive  and 
dangerous. For instance, note passing, excessive talking, getting off the task, monkeying around, sleeping, 
using mobile phone, being rude and etc. Ultimately, these behaviors are all attempts to either monopolize or 
show disregard for the classroom and they can be irritating to faculty and other students. More importantly, 
they can negatively impact teaching and learning (Toppin & Pullens, 2015). Each of these attitudes require 
different types of responses based on the context of the behavior. Therefore, the students who show those 
behaviors can easily derail the learning process and create an unpleasant environment.  

3.  Study  

    3.1   Needs Analysis 

According to andragogy, the critical element in defining the gaps is the learners’ own perception of the 
discrepancy between  where they are now and  where  they want and need to be (Knowles, Holton & Swan-
son,  2015).  The  basic  need  for  the  participants  to  acquire  skills  to  basically  manage  the  difficult  students. 
This will be substantiated by training participants on how to become confidant to handle these students. Ac-
cording  to  Knowles,  Holton  and  Swanson  (2015)  when  learners  understand  how  the  acquisition  of  certain 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

knowledge or skills will add to their ability to perform better in life, they enter into even didactic instructional sit-
uations with a clearer sense of purpose and see what they learn as more personal. Considering an increasing 
number of young teachers in Azerbaijan, the research is carried out for supporting beginning teachers. Begin-
ning teachers have a need for practical solutions to managing challenging students, and some strategies and 
techniques immediately in relation to specific situations. Knowles, Holton and Swanson (2015) state that adult 
learners acquire new information and skills in relation to problems and challenges arising from real world occur-
rences  rather  than  formulating  solutions  based  on  theory.  Therefore,  a  drastic  shift  from  «how  to»  exploring 
new methods also needed to be initiated as continuation within the existing methods «what to».  

According to the Hole educational objectives can be stated as the principles of action that are likely to 
achieve desired changes in the learner. According to andragogic theory, the learner is likely to resist unless 
he  or  she  freely  chooses  them  as  being  relevant  to  his  or  her  self-diagnosed  needs  (Knowles,  Holton,  & 
Swanson, 2015). Maslow, with his conception of self-actualization as the ultimate aim of learning, also sees 
goal formation as a highly dynamic process occurring through the interaction of the learner with his experi-
ence.  Therefore,  at  the  end  of  the  research  the  participant  will  gain  the  skills  on  building  positive  relation-
ships  with  difficult  students,  fostering  students’  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  classroom  and  their  involve-
ment in other students’ learning as well as their own, implementing strategies to counter students’ negative 
attributions and reputations within classroom, using praise and encouragement more effectively for targeted 
behaviors. Moreover, they will learn how and when to ignore the students’ inappropriate responses. It is also 
aimed to change the perception of beginning teachers that not all disruptive students are difficult to handle. 

4.  Discussion  

Various  methods  will  be  used  in  order  to  engage  the  learners  and  achieve  the  learning  objectives 
(Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 2015). First, short presentation will be followed by  stimulating activities. For 
example,  to think  of  difficult  students  and  their  problems  to  carry  out  the  suggestions  in  their  setting.  Next 
comes, a more complex method «jigsaw» technique  where different cases  about difficult students are con-
sidered. The complete picture of the phenomenon should be taken into account. 

Another flexible and useful method is perhaps the case or problem scenario presented to subgroups. 
The  case  method  is  depicted  as  a  teaching  method  that  requires  students  to  confront  with  real life  events 
and  analyze,  evaluate,  and  make  recommendations  about  those  events  (Moore,  2010).  To  put  it  another 
way, a case is any situation or set of situations in which a person or persons are engaged in an activity that 
reflects  real-life  practice  in  a  particular  domain  (Ozkan,  2002).  The  goal  of  this  procedure  is  integration  of 
knowledge, not the learning of skills (Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 2015). McFarlane (2015) states that case 
studies can help reinforce concepts and understanding, develop critical and analytical skills, foster team ef-
forts in developing solutions to problems and challenges simulating real world situations, and make lessons 
more interactive and memorable. 

Then, fish bowl technique will be used which consists of a small circle of group members within a larg-
er circle. Members of the inner circle «practice» by interacting through problem solving, discussing while the 
outer  circle  observes  them  and  provides  feedback. This  structure  provides  an  opportunity  to  practice judg-
ment  that  is,  evaluating  the  contributions  offered  by  others.  They  will  also  be  encouraged  to  generate  as 
many solutions as possible but not to be critical of any of them. Each group passes its solutions on to anoth-
er  whose  task  is  to  critically  examine the  solutions  offered  for feasibility,  cost  effectiveness  and  to  suggest 
ways  that  the  various  solutions  might  be  tested.  These  teaching  strategies  provide  students  with  high  re-
sponsibility, critical thinking ability, progress, peer learning, collaboration with others, solving authentic prob-
lems (Stefaniak & Tracey, 2015).  

Conclusion 

Four-step model- reaction, learning, behavior and result evaluation by Kirkpatrick D. L. will be used in 
evaluaiton. The first level is reaction evaluation, getting data about how the learners are responding to a pro-
gram  as  it  takes  place  what  they  like  most  and  least  and  what  positive  and  negative  feelings  they  have 
(Knowles, Holton, & Swanson, 2015). The learning will be assessed the earning through testing. In order to 
get an accurate measure of the impact of the work, all students have to be questioned. Thus, participants are 
overly  optimistic.  A  delayed  measure  may  provide  a  more  accurate  reflection  of  the  teachers’  satisfaction. 
Through  doing  this  both  result  and  behavior  will  be  evaluated,  the  primary  purpose  of  which  is  to  improve 
teaching  and  learning  not,  as  is  so  often  misunderstood,  to  justify  what  we  are  doing  (Knowles,  Holton,  & 
Swanson, 2015). 

References 

1.  Knowles M.S., Holton E.F., & Swanson, R. A. (2015). The adult learner. The definitive classic in dult education 

and human resource development. New York : Routledge. 

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

2.  McFarlane D.A. (2015). Guidelines for Using Case Studies in the TeachingLearning Process. College Quarter-

ly, 18 (1). 

3.  Moore D.T. (2010). Forms and issues in experiential learning. (D.M. Qualters, Ed.) New Directions for Teach-

ing and Learning p. 3–13. 

4.  Moreno, G., & Bullock, L.M. (2015, November 2). Offering Behavioral Assistance to Latino Students Demon-

strating Challenging Behaviors. International Journal of Emotional Intelligence, 7, p. 36–48. 

5.  Ozkan B. (2002). The Use of Video Cases in Teacher Education. The Turkish Online Journal of Educational 

Technology, 1, 37–40. 

6.  Stefaniak J.E. & Tracey M.W. (2015). An Exploration of Student Experiences with Learner-Centered Instruc-

tional Strategies. Contemporary Educational Technology, 6, p. 96. 

7.  Toppin, I.N., & Pullens, L.M. (2015). Reducing Classroom Disputes Between Faculty and Students. Journal of 

Instructional Research , 4, p. 118–125. 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
