БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 622.245.4 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2021 

ОБЗОР НАБУХАЮЩИХ ПАКЕРОВ 
––––––– 
OVERVIEW OF SWELLABLE PACKERS 

Шмончева Елена Евгеньевна 
кандидат технических наук, доцент, 
доцент кафедры «Нефтегазовая инженерия», 
Азербайджанский государственный университет 
нефти и промышленности 

Новрузова Судаба Гаджи кызы 
доктор философии по технике, 
Азербайджанский государственный университет 
нефти и промышленности 

Алиев Мовсум Хафиз оглы 
магистр, 
Азербайджанский государственный университет 
нефти и промышленности 

Shmoncheva Yelena Yevgenyevna 
Candidate of Technical Sciences, 
Associate Professor, 
Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry University 

Novruzova Sudaba Haji  
Doctor of Philosophy in Engineering, 
Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry University 

Aliyev Movsum Hafiz  
Master, 
Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry University 

Аннотация.  Как  известно,  разрушение  цементной  связи  в 
скважине  может  привести  к  снижению  продуктивности,  сниже-
нию  давления  в  скважине  и  преждевременному  проникнове-
нию  воды.  Для  восстановления  цементной  связи  требуется 
дорогостоящий  капитальный  ремонт  скважин.  Набухающие 
пакеры используются для предотвращения разрушения связи. 
Когда в цементном слое кольцевого пространства  образуются 
трещины,  эластомер  набухающего  пакера  взаимодействует  с 
пластовыми флюидами и набухает, тем самым предотвращая 
дальнейшее движение флюида. 
В  этой  статье  обсуждаются  набухающие  пакеры  и  их  преиму-
щества. 

Annotation. As known, the destruction of the 
cement  bond  in  the  well  can  lead  to  loss  of 
productivity,  lower  pressure  in  the  well  and 
premature  penetration  of  water.  To  restore 
the cement bond requires expensive overhaul 
of  wells.  Swellable  packers  are  used  to  pre-
vent  the  destruction  of  the  bond.  When 
cracks form in the cement layer  of the  annu-
lus,  the  elastomer  of  the  swellable  packer 
interacts  with the formation fluids  and swells, 
thereby preventing further fluid movement. 
This  article  discusses  swellable  packers  and 
their benefits. 

Ключевые  слова:  набухающий  пакер,  эластомер,  цемент, 
пластовые жидкости, защитные кольца. 

Keywords:  swellable  packer,  elastomer, 
cement, formation fluids, protective rings. 

T 

he advantage of swellable packers is that there are no moving parts in their design, which makes 
it possible to avoid special operations. The sealing element of swellable packers has the ability to 
self-repair sealing properties. Also, the advantage of such packers is that their use provides reliable and irre-
versible isolation of formations [1]. 

Swellable packers should be used in wells with damaged casing [2–4]. 
Unlike packers of other designs, which are preferably installed in areas of stable impermeable rocks, 
swellable packers can also be used in open hole wells with unstable soft and loose rocks, since the sealing 
element of this packer is able to protect the borehole walls from disturbing the integrity of the formation. Suit-
able for use in wells with an uneven cross-section, since when sealing element of swellable packer can take 
the form of a wellbore.  

Several parameters of swellable packer: 
–   the  swelling  rate  of  the  elastomer  depends  on  the  composition  of  the  elastomer,  the  physico-
chemical  composition  of  the fluid  in  which  it  swells,  the  degree  of  access  of  the  fluid  to  the  surface  of  the 
elastomer, as well as temperature conditions; 

–   elastomer which is swells in water, the swelling process proceeds according to the principle of os-
mosis  –  the  process  of  movement  of  water  molecules  through  a  semipermeable  membrane. Water  pene-
trates  into the  elastomer  and is  retained  there  due  to the  difference in  the mineralization  gradient  between 
the fluid and the elastomer; 

–   elastomer which is swells in oil, absorption, diffusion processes are observed; 
–   depending on temperature conditions, mineralization of produced water, hydrocarbon composition, 
degree of fluid access to the elastomer, the swelling process can last from several hours to several days and 
weeks. A full increase in volume can vary from 100 % to 200 % or more. 

413 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2021 

However, basically, elastomeric packers that swell under the action of well fluids are consists of a cas-
ing with an elastomer swelling from contact with a particular fluid. The casing is provided with threaded con-
nections that meet customer requirements. At both ends of the elastomer there are anti-extrusion rings that 
resist extrusion. Standard elastomer length: 0,9; 1,5; 3; 4,5 and 6 m. It should be noted that swellable pack-
ers with elongated elastomers are able to withstand higher pressure drops. 

Protective anti-extrusion rings protect the sealing element (elastomer) and guide the packer during its 

running into the well [5–7].  

After lowering and installing the packer in the required place, the protective rings prevent the elasto-
mer from being squeezed out. In most cases, the extrusion protection of packers is designed in such a way 
as  to  ensure  swelling  of  the  elastomer  in  the  radial  direction.  A  new  type  of  protective  rings  (stop  ring)  is 
known  whose advantage is the ability to shorten the length of the packer, while maintaining the necessary 
pressure drop. In this case, the length of the swellable sealing element (elastomer) is the main factor for the 
contact area. For withstanding of swellable packer to the great differential pressure required long elastomer 

Systems that regulate the swelling process when swellable packers are lowered into the well there is a 
risk of premature swelling of the sealing element in contact with the wellbore fluid. Most often this happens in 
case  of  unexpected  stops  during  the  running  of  the  well  with  swellable  packers.  Swelling  of  the  elastomer 
should  occur  at  the  installation  site  in  the  interval  necessary  for  isolation.  In  order  to  exclude  premature 
packer  swelling,  various  systems  are  used  that  can  slow  down  the  swelling  process.  Manufacturers  of 
swellable packers strive to create an elastomeric composition for a particular well.  

For this purpose, systems are developed that provide regulation of the swelling process of the sealing 
element (elastomer) so that the setting time can be set based on the needs of the customer. Control systems 
for the swelling process include polymers with the inherent properties of slowing down swelling, as well as vari-
ous delayed diffusion barriers and coatings. Disadvantages of swellable packers despite the many advantages 
of swellable packers compared to packers of other designs, their use is limited by a number of factors.  

One  of  the  relative  disadvantages  of  swellable  packers  is  the  time  needed  to  swell  the  sealing  ele-
ment. Mechanical and hydraulic packers are installed and begin to act immediately after the descent into the 
well. Therefore, where urgent isolation is required (in case of step cementing, pneumatic drilling, prevention 
of aeration of cement, etc.), it is advisable to use hydraulic and hydromechanical packers.  

The  use  of  swellable  packers  is  also  unacceptable  in  extreme  conditions,  for  example,  in  gas  wells 

with high pressures and high temperatures, or in Arctic wells.  

When  using  swellable  packers  in  practice, it is  necessary  to  take  into  account that  when  the  elasto-
mers swell, the intermolecular bonds are weakened, as a result of which their mechanical properties are re-
duced. As a result, under the influence of forces caused by the pressure drop, the tendency to extrude, force 
out, or deforms, which leads to the loss of the sealing ability of the elastomer.  

Also, at high temperature differences (for example, when pumping a fracturing fluid for making hydrau-
lic fracturing), the swelling elastomer can be reduced so much that its sealing ability will be completely lost. 
Given  these  circumstances,  it is  recommended  to  use  swellable  packers  with  caution in case  of  significant 
pressure and temperature differences. In multi-stage processing, where the use of a large number of pack-
ers, the use of swollen packers are required wholeheartedly. The work of swollen packers does not require 
the creation of loads (pressures) with sides and complex operations with pipes. The swollen packer can be 
used in wells with damaged casing column, as the packer element (elastomer) has self-restoring properties. 

Packers of these structures (hydraulic, mechanical, etc.) are recommended to be installed in unrefined 
wells in places of stable, impenetrable rock. Swelling packers can be installed in wells  with soft, loose and 
unstable species, so the swollen sealing element is able to protect the walls of the wells from violation of the 
integrity of the formation. 

One of the real factors in the work of packers is time. Hydraulic and mechanical packers are installed 
quickly and are activated immediately after the start of the layout. In this case, the load on the casing column 
carries  a  strong  and  short-lived  character  that  can  cause  damage  to  it.  Swelling  or  packers  begin  to  act 
gradually, in the course of several days, which provides long-term insulation of layers and protects the cas-
ing column from damage. Recently, packers with hybrid compaction systems have appeared. 

Several  companies  provide  swellable  packer  such  as:  TAM,  Halliburton, Weatherford  and  etc.  TAM 
company  provides vary types  of  swellable  packer like FREECAP  I, FREECAP  II, FREECAP  III, FREECAP 
IV,  Smart  FREECAP,  FREECAP  Geothermal  and  TAM’s  FastSwell®  technology.  Unlike  others  packers  of 
TAM  company  TAM’s  FastSwell®  technology  provides  a  fast  swell  and  controlled  swell  time  in  slow  swell 
conditions.  FastSwell  system  has  developed  to  enhance  into  heavy  oil  and  to  improve  performance in  the 
high salinity and low temperature environment. Main benefit of TAM’s oil or water swellable elastomer can be 
used in all environments. Features of TAM’s FastSwell® technology are: 

–   Swellable  Packer  touches  to  well  wall  approximately 2,5  days  with  a  5–3  /  4 in.  (146 mm) OD to 

seal in a 6–1 / 8 in. open hole with well conditions of 140 °F (60 °C) and 9,0 ppg 10 %; 

–   Variable seal length; 
–   Anti-extrusion end rings; 
–   Provides excellent sealing in corroded casing and in irregular shapes. 

414 

 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2021 

Another company which is provides swellable packers are Weatherford. This swellable packer called 
GENESIS Anuulus Swellable Packer. This packer suitable for open hole and cased-hole well environments. 
Features, advantages and benefits are: 
–   Absence of moving parts; 
–   Can be used with most thread connections and tubular configurations; 
–   Isolate irregular changing annular geometries and hole shapes. 

Литература: 

1.  Исаев А.А., Малыхин В.И., Шарифуллин А.А. Разобщение пластов и изоляция межпластовых перетоков 

при помощи водонабухающих пакеров // Булатовские чтения. – 2018. – Т. 3. – С. 127–132. 

2.  Казымов Ш.П., Абдуллаева Э.С., Раджабов Н.М. Обзор конструкций набухающих пакеров и возможно-
сти их применения на месторождениях Азербайджана // Научные труды НИПИ Нефтегаз ГНКАР. – 2015. – № 3. – 
С. 43–51. 

3.  Мамедбеков О.К. Экспериментальное исследование процесса набухания пакера при цементировании // 

Азербайджанское нефтяное хозяйство. – 2019. – № 11. – С. 17–20. 

4.  Сугаков  И.А.  Совершенствование  технических  средств  для  разобщения  пластов  и  изоляции  межпла-
стовых перетоков. Нефтенабухающие пакера // В сборнике: Современные проблемы гидрогеологии, инженерной 
геологии  и  гидрогеоэкологии  Евразии  Материалы  Всероссийской  конференции  с  международным  участием  c 
элементами научной школы. Национальный исследовательский Томский политехнический университет. – 2015. – 
С. 656–660. 

5.  Water Swell Packers with High Salinity Tolerance and Increased Performance Envelope. SPE Middle East Oil 

and Gas Show and Conference, 6–9 March / A.K. Sadana [et al.]. – Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain, 2017. 

6.  Sadana  A.,  Kovalchuk  A.,  Cook  C.  Delayed Oil  Swell  Packer  for Openhole  Zonal Isolation  of  Long  Laterals 

Wells // International Petroleum Technology Conference, 13–15 January. – Dhahran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2020. 

7.  First Worldwide  Application  of  HP/HT Water  Swellable  Packers  Eliminates  Deployment  Risks  and  Improves 
MSF Efficiency in Tight Gas Reservoirs / R.E. Arias [et al.] // SPE Middle East Oil and Gas Show and Conference, 18–21 
March. – Manama, Bahrain, 2019. 

References: 

1.  Isaev  A.A.,  Malykhin  V.I.,  Sharifullin  A.A.  Reservoir  separation  and  isolation  of  interstitial  flows  using  water 

swell packers // Bulatov Readings. – 2018. – Vol. 3. – P. 127–132. 

2.  Kazymov Sh.P., Abdullaeva E.S., Rajabov N.M. Review of swelling packers designs and possibilities of their 

application in the fields of Azerbaijan // Scientific works of NIPI Neftegaz SOCAR. – 2015. – № 3. – P. 43–51. 

3.  Mamedbekov  O.K.  Experimental  study  of  packer  swelling  during  cementation  //  Azerbaijan  Oil  Economy.  – 

2019. – № 11. – P. 17–20. 

4.  Sugakov I.A. Improvement of technical means for reservoir separation and isolation of inter reservoir flows. Oil 
swell packers // In a collection: Modern problems of hydrogeology, engineering geology and hydrogeoecology of Eurasia 
Materials  of the  All-Russian  conference  with  international  participation  with  elements  of  scientific  school.  National  Re-
search Tomsk Polytechnic University. – 2015. – P. 656–660. 

5.  Water Swell Packers with High Salinity Tolerance and Increased Performance Envelope. SPE Middle East Oil 

and Gas Show and Conference, 6–9 March / A.K. Sadana [et al.]. – Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain, 2017. 

6.  Sadana  A.,  Kovalchuk  A.,  Cook  C.  Delayed Oil  Swell  Packer  for Openhole  Zonal Isolation  of  Long  Laterals 

Wells // International Petroleum Technology Conference, 13–15 January. – Dhahran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 2020. 

7.  First Worldwide  Application  of  HP/HT Water  Swellable  Packers  Eliminates  Deployment  Risks  and  Improves 
MSF Efficiency in Tight Gas Reservoirs / R.E. Arias [et al.] // SPE Middle East Oil and Gas Show and Conference, 18–21 
March. – Manama, Bahrain, 2019. 

415 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
