БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 665.61.543.32 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

МОДЕЛИРОВАНИЕ ПОЛИМЕРНОГО ЗАВОДНЕНИЯ  
В ОДНОЙ ИЗ ИРАНСКИХ ЗАЛЕЖЕЙ ТЯЖЕЛОЙ НЕФТИ 

SIMULATION OF POLYMER FLOODING  
IN ONE OF IRANIAN HEAVY OIL RESERVOIR  

Мостэджерэн Гортэни Масуд 
Phd Candidate and Researcher, 
Российский государственный университет  
нефти и газа имени И.М. Губкина  

Телеков Виктор Павлович 
Associate Professor, Phd,  
Российский государственный университет  
нефти и газа имени И.М. Губкина  

Mostajeran Gortani Masoud  
Phd Candidate and Researcher, 
Gubkin National University of Oil and Gas  

Telkov Viktor Pavlovich  
Associate Professor, Phd,  
Gubkin National University of Oil and Gas  

Аннотация.  Полимерное  затопление  является  наиболее  важ-
ным процессом повышения нефтеотдачи (МУН), улучшающим 
соотношение подвижности воды и нефти. Полимеры действуют 
в основном, увеличивая вязкость закачиваемой воды и умень-
шая  проницаемость  зоны  качания,  подтверждая  увеличение 
эффективности  вертикальной  и  поверхностной  развертки  за-
качки воды и, следовательно, увеличивая добычу нефти. 
В данном исследовании, первоначально на основе эксперимен-
тальной работы, были исследованы свойства полимера и кон-
центрация раствора полимера. Затем было смоделировано по-
лимерного заводнения. 

Annotation. Polymer flooding is the most im-
portant enhanced oil recovery (EOR) process, 
improving  the  water-oil  mobility  ratio.  Poly-
mers act basically  increasing the viscosity of 
the  injected  water  and  reducing  the  swept 
zone  permeability,  approving  an  increase  in 
the vertical and  areal sweep efficiency of the 
water injection, and, consequently, increasing 
oil recovery. 
In  this  study,  initially  based  on  experimental 
work the polymer properties were investigated 
the  concentration  of  polymer  solution.  Then 
the polymer flooding was simulated in different 
scenarios. 
This study shows the optimum concentration 
could improve polymer properties. 

Ключевые  слова:  иранский  резервуар  тяжелой  нефти,  поли-
мерное затопление, эксперимент, моделирование. 

Keywords:  Iranian  heavy  oil  reservoir,  poly-
mer flooding, Experiment, Simulation. 

T 

here is now a general agreement that the oil and gas resources most easily recovered have already 
been discovered [1]. Heavy oil and bitumen sources are required to be produced by new technologies 
to catch future needs in the energy market. The economical and environmental obstacles according to the applica-
tion of thermal methods in deep and thin reservoirs are crucial challenges for the oil and gas industry not only in 
North America, but also in other spots such as Latin America, Middles East, and China. The most costly step in a 
thermal process like SAGD is the required energy for turning water into steam. This makes such type of recovery 
processes to be cumbersome in terms of energy supply and usage. Fresh water supply which is an environmental 
concern is also another example of associated drawbacks with the thermal methods [2]. 

One  of  the  most  essential  techniques  for  enhancing  oil  recovery  is  waterflooding  or  water  injection, 
which is categorized as a secondary recovery method. Water injection into a reservoir results in a phenomenon 
called voidage replacement in which we intend to deliver pressure support to the reservoir. Ultimate reservoir 
dynamic performance and recovery assessment in water flooding process has been extensively studied and 
evaluated during past few years [2–8]. This method which is the most common practice implemented at the 
end  of  primary  production  have  potential  problems  associated  with.  Considering  the  issues  and  challenges 
related to the application of water-flooding in heavy oil reservoirs, polymer flooding has become a more desir-
able choice for EOR processes than waterflooding. 

The objective of this study based on the results of experimental study of polymer flooding in heavy oil 
reservoirs [9–10]. we simulate different scenario with different concentration and check the results of the ex-
perimental study. 

Experimental studies of polymer flooding were carried out on a special filtration unit using a core holder 

with  dimensions  of  12–4  cm  to  study  the  effect  of  viscosity  of  the  polymer  solution  and  heterogeneity  of                                   
the porous medium on the increase in oil production after flooding. 

In this work was selected polymer HPAM in sea water for polymer solution for the study. In the frame-
work of the presented study, we studied the effect of the polymer concentration in the solution on the recovery 
of heavy oil from the formation.  

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

Table 1 – Property of the sample 

Parameter  

Reservoir temperature  

Oil Density 

Oil viscosity  

permeability 

Porosity  

Value 

100 

948 

204 

0,01 

18 

Type of reservoir  

Sand stone 

Unit 
(cid:176) С 

kg/м³ 

cp 

мкм² 

% 

– 

To simulate changes in the properties of the polymer solution in reservoir conditions, the polymer solu-

tion prepared on the basis of sea water was placed in a thermostat at a temperature of 100 °C. 

Under these conditions, the state of the polymer solution was evaluated within four weeks after the start 

of the experiment, the results are shown below. All measurements were done by Rheometer Antonpaar. 

Figure 1 

Based on rheological studies, it can be concluded that the polymer concentration below 3 kg/m3 is not 
very suitable for flooding. Subsequently, experiments were carried out on polymer flooding with a concentration 
of 2, 5, 7, 10 and 12 kg/m3. The experimental results are given below. 

An analysis of the results shows that with an increase in concentration from 2 to 5 kg/m3, an increase in 
oil recovery of up to 13 % is observed, with an increase in concentration from 7 to 12 kg/m3, the increase in oil 
recovery is approximately the same – 27–29 % and practically does not depend on increase in the concentra-
tion  of  the  polymer  solution.  The  dependence  of  the  increase  in  the  oil  recovery  coefficient  during  polymer 
flooding after water flooding on the polymer concentration in the solution is shown in Figure 1, 2. Under these 
conditions, it can be assumed that the threshold value of the rational polymer concentration during polymer 
flooding does not exceed 7 kg/m3. The above is markedly correlated with the results of the authors' studies 
[13, 14], who also noted the irrationality of the excessive increase in the concentration of the polymer solution, 
and, consequently, the viscosity of the polymer solution. In this case, commercial introduction may require a 
change in concentration, taking into account the sorption of the polymer by the porous medium, and various 
types of destruction. Excessive concentration can not only not be economically justified, but also not give a 
significant technological result. 

The  main  objective  of  polymer  flooding  is  to  control  the  viscosity  of  water  by  adding  polymer  to                               

the injected water to reduce its mobility. The decrease in the relative permeability of water that occurs as a 
result of polymer adsorption is not as obvious as in the case of rocks with low permeability. The greatest benefit 
from flooding polymers is to increase the viscosity of the aqueous phase, which improves driving efficiency. 

As indicated [9, 10] and experimental results, a methodology was developed to determine the rational 
value  of  the  viscosity  of  the  polymer,  and  by  this  method  we  determined  the  optimal  value  of  the  polymer 
concentration. 

We consider a polymer with a concentration of 2 kg/m3, 5 kg/m3, 7 kg/m3 and use the ECLIPSE 100 

simulation package, simulate the studied field. 

The reservoir model consists of three layers (grid size) with different values of permeability and porosity. 

In this case, the following average values of permeability and porosity were set in layers: for the upper layer                    
k1 = 100 mD and m1 = 18 %, for the middle layer k2 = 30 mD and m2 = 15 %, for the lower k3 = 200 mD and                  
m3 = 21 %. The spread in the values of porosity and permeability of formations is in the range of 10–600 mD 
and 8–24 %. The image of the model is shown in the figure 3, 4. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

Figure 2 

Figure 3 – The reservoir model with a porosity distribution 

Figure 4 – The reservoir model with a permeability distribution 

We consider a polymer with a concentration of 2 kg/m3, 5 kg/m3, 7 kg/m3 and use the ECLIPSE 100 

simulation package, simulate the studied field. 

Based on the results of the above experiments, the following conclusions are made: 
1.  Polymer water flooding can increase oil recovery in the studied conditions, when displacing heavy 

oil with a viscosity of 204 mPa·s. 

2.  For  effective  polymer  flooding  of  a  heavy  oil  formation,  the  concentration  of  the  polymer  solution 
should  not  be  lower  than  the  threshold  value  of  the  rational  concentration.  For  the  experimental  conditions 
presented in this article, the threshold concentration is about 5–7 kg/m3. 

3.  In field conditions, it should be higher to take into account the processes of polymer sorption and 

degradation of the polymer solution. 

In conclusion, it can be noted that polymer flooding is not only a promising technology for the extraction of 

heavy oil, but is already now effectively used by companies operating fields containing heavy, extra heavy oil. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

Figure 5 – The results of the simulation  

Литература  

1.  Innovative  methods  for  flow-unit  and  pore-structure  analyses  in  a  tight  siltstone  and  shale  gas  reservoir  /            

C.R. Clarkson [et al.] // AAPG Bull. – 2012. – № 96. – Р. 355–74. 

2.  Water Injection and Water Flooding Under Fracturing Conditions / J.C. Noirot [et al.] // Middle East Oil Show, 

Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2003. 

3.  Direct  visualization  of  designer  water flooding  in  model experiments /  A.  Cense [et  al.] //  SPE  Enhanced  Oil 

Recovery Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2011. 

4.  Zhu Z. Thermal streamline simulation for hot waterflooding / Z. Zhu, M. Gerritsen, M. Thiele // SPE Reservoir 

Eval Eng. – 2010. – № 13. – Р. 372–82. 

5.  Ensemble-based water flooding optimization applied to mature fields / O. Pajonk [et al.] // SPE Middle East Oil 

and Gas Show and Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers.  – 2011. 

6.  Fjelde I. Low salinity water flooding experiments and in- terpretation by simulations / I. Fjelde, S.M. Asen, A.V. 

Omekeh // SPE Improved Oil Recovery Symposium, Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2012. 

7.  Alzayer  H.  Numerical  simulation  of  improved  heavy  oil  recovery  by  low-salinity  water  injection  and  polymer 
flooding / H. Alzayer, M. Sohrabi // SPE Saudi Arabia section technical symposium and exhibition, Society of Petroleum 
Engineers. – 2013. 

8.  Hosseini  B.K.  Streamline-based  Reservoir  Geomechanics  Coupling  Strategies  for  Full  Field  Simulations  /              

B.K. Hosseini, R. Chalaturnyk // ECMOR XIV-14th European Conference on the Mathematics of Oil Recovery. – 2014. 

9.  Повышение нефтеизвлечения на месторождениях высоковязкой и тяжелой нефти с помощью полимер-

ного заводнения / В.П. Телков [и др.] // Нефтяное хозяйство. – 2018. – № 5. – С. 60–63. 

10. Телков В.П. Оценка критериев применения полимерного заводнения для вытеснения тяжелых, высоко-

вязких нефтей Ирана / В.П. Телков, М.Г. Мостаджеран // Экспозиция Нефть Газ. – 2018. – № 4(64). – P. 52–55. 

References 

1.  Innovative  methods  for  flow-unit  and  pore-structure  analyses  in  a  tight  siltstone  and  shale  gas  reservoir  /            

C.R. Clarkson [et al.] // AAPG Bull. – 2012. – № 96. – Р. 355–74. 

2.  Water Injection and Water Flooding Under Fracturing Conditions / J.C. Noirot [et al.] // Middle East Oil Show, 

Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2003. 

3.  Direct  visualization  of  designer  water flooding  in  model experiments /  A.  Cense [et  al.] //  SPE  Enhanced  Oil 

Recovery Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2011. 

4.  Zhu Z. Thermal streamline simulation for hot waterflooding / Z. Zhu, M. Gerritsen, M. Thiele // SPE Reservoir 

Eval Eng. – 2010. – № 13. – Р. 372–82. 

5.  Ensemble-based water flooding optimization applied to mature fields / O. Pajonk [et al.] // SPE Middle East Oil 

and Gas Show and Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2011. 

6.  Fjelde  I.  Low  salinity  water  flooding  experiments  and  in-  terpretation  by  simulations  /  I.  Fjelde,  S.M.  Asen,                   

A.V. Omekeh // SPE Improved Oil Recovery Symposium, Society of Petroleum Engineers. – 2012. 

7.  Alzayer  H.  Numerical  simulation  of  improved  heavy  oil  recovery  by  low-salinity  water  injection  and  polymer 
flooding / H. Alzayer, M. Sohrabi // SPE Saudi Arabia section technical symposium and exhibition, Society of Petroleum 
Engineers. – 2013. 

8.  Hosseini  B.K.  Streamline-based  Reservoir  Geomechanics  Coupling  Strategies  for  Full  Field  Simulations  /              

B.K. Hosseini, R. Chalaturnyk // ECMOR XIV-14th European Conference on the Mathematics of Oil Recovery. – 2014. 

9.  Increase of oil recovery at the high-viscosity and heavy oil fields by means of the polymer flooding / V.P. Telkov 

[et al.] // Oil economy. – 2018. – № 5. – Р. 60–63. 

10. Telkov V.P. Estimation of the polymer flooding application criteria for the heavy, high-viscosity oil displacement / 

V.P. Telkov, M.G. Mostadzheran // Exposition Nefty Gaz. – 2018. – № 4(64). – P. 52–55. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
