БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 665.642.2 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

ИНФОРМАЦИОННО-ИСКУССТВЕННЫЙ ИНТЕЛЛЕКТ 
●●●●●● 
INFORMATION AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 

Ализада Акиф Вали 
доктор философии по технике, доцент, 
доцент кафедры  
управления и системной инжинерии, 
Азербайджанский государственный  
университет нефти и промышленности 

Мурадли Вугар Ариф 
магистрант кафедры управления  
и системной инжинерии, 
Азербайджанский государственный  
университет нефти и промышленности  

Alizada Akif Vali 
Doctor of Philosophy in Technology,  
Associate Professor, 
Associate Professor  
of department Control  
and System Engineering, 
Azerbaijan state university  
of oil and industry 

Muradli Vuqar Arif 
Master of Department Control  
and System Engineering, 
Azerbaijan state university  
of oil and industry 

Аннотация.  Искусственный  интеллект  –  научное  поле  было 
сформировано  в  50-х  годах  прошлого  века  на  стыке  киберне-
тики, лингвистики, психологии и программирования. 

Annotation. Artificial Intelligence – The scien-
tific field was formed in the 50s of the last cen-
tury at the crossroads of cybernetics, linguis-
tics, psychology and programming. 

Ключевые  слова:  проблема искусственного  интеллекта,  опи-
сание знаний, математическая теория. 

Keywords:  problem  of  artificial  intelligence, 
description  of  knowledge,  mathematical  the-
ory. 

A 

puters. 

rtificial  Intelligence  (SI)  is  an  artificially  created  system  that  simulates  (imitates)  the  thinking  of 
modern people, its psychology, and their real intelligence and implements them in modern com-

Artificial Intelligence – The scientific field was formed in the 50s of the last century at the crossroads of 

cybernetics, linguistics, psychology and programming. 

The main purpose of the creation of artificial intelligence was to provide machines to solve problems 
that were traditionally addressed by humans, and this is one of the most complex scientific and practical prob-
lems facing humanity. 

With the help of artificial intelligence, it has been proven that, under certain conditions, the Companions 
have been able to prove the mathematical theory of human activity, compose poems, translations, search for 
complex information and so on. has the ability to perform. 

Scientific research in this area is conducted in two directions: 
The first direction is to look at the product of the intellectual behavior of a person and learn about its 
structure. It studies various factors of the human intellectual activity and solves these problems and executes 
products with the help of modern technology, ie computers. If the solution of such issues is implemented at 
the  highest  level  in  the  computer, then  the  corresponding  intellectual  activity  is considered  automated.  The 
intention of this direction is mainly due to the development of computers and the improvement of programming. 
This direction is also called machine intelligent artificial intelligence [1]. 

The second direction is based on the data of the neuro-physiological and psychological mechanisms of 
intellectual activity, that is, the conscious activity of the person. Researchers and designers are trying to per-
form these actions with technical facilities so that they can perform human activities within a pre-assigned task. 

The classification of works in the field of artificial intelligence is presented in the table. 
The following basic directions for the study of artificial intelligence should be defined: 
1.  Presentation  of  knowledge  (creation  of  «knowledge  base»,  presentation  of  special  knowledge  in 

memory of intellectual systems, formation); 

2.  Knowledge manipulation (intellectual systems teach methods and methods of knowledge manipula-

tion); 

3.  Communication (eg computer-aided interpretation of the text, human interaction with the computer); 
4.  Perception of information (training of computers to image recognition, analysis of visual information); 
5.  Teaching solutions to problems that intellectual systems have not encountered so far; 
6.  Normative, socially oriented (models’ creation). 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

Drawing 1 – The types of Artificial Intelligence 

The following complex methods are used in the study of artificial intelligence: 
Methods of mathematical logic; 
Frame languages; 
Methods of applied and mathematical linguistics; 
Methods of conventional psychology; 
Investigation of recognition mechanisms. 
One  of  the  main  problems  for  the  creation  of  artificial  intelligence  is  the  description  and  use  of 

knowledge. The following problems must be solved in order to create basic knowledge: 

First, it is necessary to develop the application knowledge needed in the relevant field. Writing this re-
quires  a  specialist  –  both  application  and  mathematician  –  to  work  together.  Formation  or  selection  of  the 
conceptual scheme of the model is required to formulate the problem. 

Second, the description of knowledge is problematic. This, in turn, is to preserve memory in the com-

puter with the help of a built-in machine. 

The third is the problem of using knowledge. This also requires the development of computational theory 

and other converters so that they can be used in turn-based models. 

Fourth is a technology problem that is usually addressed by system programmers. This is the software 

of the models, that is, the creation of a knowledge base and control system. 

In general, the conceptual model of knowledge can be conventionally divided into conceptual and em-
pirical models. The conceptual model for solving some probes is provided with the help of a heuristic method. 
Because the conceptual writing model cannot guarantee that it will be applied in all practical situations [2]. 

Литература / References 

1.  Mübariz Sevdimalı oğlu Xəlilov «İnformatika» Dərslik Səhifə 43–56. 
2.  Bakı Biznes və Kooperasiya Kolleci. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
