БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 665.642.2 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

СИСТЕМА КОНТРОЛЯ ПОТЕРЬ ЭНЕРГИИ 
●●●●●● 
CONTROL SYSTEM OF ENERGY LOSS 

Абзарли Матин Мубариз 
магистрант кафедры управления  
и системной инжинерии, 
Азербайджанский государственный  
университет нефти и промышленности  

Abzarli Matin Mubariz 
Master of Department Control  
and System Engineering, 
Azerbaijan state university  
of oil and industry 

Аннотация.  Выбор  устройства  и  программного  обеспечения 
позволяет оптимизировать параметры качества системы и кон-
тролировать погрешности измерений, а также размер парамет-
ров измерений. 

Annotation. Choosing device and software is 
optimizing  quality  parameters  of  the  system 
and controlling errors in measurement also the 
size of the measurement parameters. 

Ключевые слова: потеря электроэнергии, асинхронные двига-
тели, передача энергии, частота, амплитуда, фаза. 

Keywords: electricity loss, asynchronous mo-
tors,  power  transmission,  frequency,  ampli-
tude, phase. 

I 

t is often required effective use electricity from the electrical grid for increasing efficiency of produc-
tion. The main problem in this situation it is how to decrease electricity loss. The main part of the loss 
is in the asynchronous motors which have power transmission. There are some consumer of electricity which 
have inductance character. They are also have power losses and they producing reactive power [1]. 

In thus thesis we will see how to improve efficiency of using electricity and controlling active and reactive 
power. It is recommended to create control system for measuring main parameters of the electrical devices. 
For measuring voltage with control system we need to know frequency, amplitude and phase. 

Choosing device and software is optimizing quality parameters of the system and controlling errors in 
measurement also the size of the measurement parameters. At the same times provides using measurement 
and conversion. 

The first results show that this system will reduce power loss and harmful compensation [2]. 

Литература 

7.  Железко  Ю.С.  Расчет,  анализ  и  нормирование  потерь  электроэнергии  в  электрических  сетях.  –  М.  :                   

НУ ЭНАС, 2002. – 280 с. 

8.  Воротницкий В.Э., Заслонов С.В., Туркина О.В. Методы и средства расчета, анализа и снижения потерь 

электрической энергии при ее передаче по электрическим сетям. – М. : 2006. – 167 с. 

References 

7.  Zhelezko Yu.S. Calculation, analysis and rationing of the electric power losses in the electrical networks. – M. :                  

NU ENAS, 2002. – 280 р. 

8.  Vorotnitskiy V.E., Zaslonov S.V., Turkina O.V. Methods and means for calculation, analysis and reduction of the 

electric energy loss at its transmission through the electric networks. – М. : 2006. – 167 р. 

247 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
