БУЛАТОВСКИЕ ЧТЕНИЯ 

УДК 665.642.2 

СБОРНИК СТАТЕЙ – 2020 

ПЛАНИРОВАНИЕ ПОВЕДЕНИЯ ИНТЕЛЛЕКТУАЛЬНОГО АГЕНТА  
С ПРИМЕНЕНИЕМ НЕОПРЕДЕЛЕННОЙ ЛОГИКИ ТИПА II 
●●●●●● 
PLANNING THE BEHAVIOR OF AN INTELLECTUAL AGENT  
WITH APPLICATİON OF TYPE II UNCERTAIN LOGIC 

Мурадли Вугар Ариф 
магистрант кафедры  
управления и системной инжинерии, 
Азербайджанский государственный  
университет нефти и промышленности  

Muradli Vuqar Arif 
Master of Department  
Control and System Engineering, 
Azerbaijan state university  
of oil and industry 

Аннотация.  Совершенствование  нечеткой  логики  процесса  раз-
работки для планирования поведения интеллектуального агента в 
современную  эпоху,  а  также  исследования  и  исследования, 
направленные на решение проблем, возникших в это время, были 
одной из наиболее актуальных и важных проблем все время. 

Ключевые  слова:  логика,  интеллектуальный  агент,  нечеткая 
логика. 

Annotation.  Improvement  of  fuzzy  logic  for 
the  development  process  for  the  planning  of 
the  behavior  of  the  intellectual  agent  in  the 
modern era, and the research and research to 
address the problems that have arisen at this 
time, has been one of the most pressing and 
important issues of all time. 

Keywords: logic, intellectual agent, fuzzy logic. 

I 

mprovement of fuzzy logic for the development process for the planning of the behavior of the intel-
lectual agent in the modern era, and the research and research to address the problems that have 

arisen at this time, has been one of the most pressing and important issues of all time. 

The theory of fuzzy logic is an important part of mathematics and combines classical logic and concepts. 
The notion of fuzzy logic was put forward in 1965, and its founder is Asgarzadeh, the Lutfulli Rahim oglu of 
Azerbaijan (Lutfi Zade). In the broadest sense of fuzzy logic theory is the notion of a fuzzy set defined by the 
function of belonging. It then includes the combination, intersection, and complementation of clusters, the con-
cept of fuzzy proportions, and one of the most basic concepts is the linguistic variable [2]. 

First  of  all, I  would  like  to  give  some  real  examples  to  clarify  my  point.  In  everyday  life, for  example, 
people  make  different  decisions  by  choosing  one  of  many  solutions.  Some  of  these  decisions  occur  either 
intuitively or automatically, based on the repressive practice of the decision-making process. Sometimes there 
are situations when a person cannot make an immediate decision. In this case, the person analyzes the pros 
and cons of alternatives, evaluates the possible consequences of the choice, consults with more experienced 
people, and finally makes the decision. This is most often the case in economic systems when making deci-
sions in the management of an enterprise or company. For this reason, it is necessary to study the relevant 
theory separately in information systems because of the critical role of decision-making in governance: 

First and foremost, decision-making is carried out at all stages of management, incorporating technology 

into its implementation as a necessary element. 

Secondly,  decision-making  is  an  integral  part  of  the  activities  of  any  senior  manager.  In  this  regard, 
knowledge of decision-making methods and technologies is the most important element of a leader's profes-
sional level. 

Third, decision-making systems are a modern model of economic systems. The purpose of decision-

making for information systems is that the decision-maker relates only to the field of action. 

At the same time, it should be noted that decision-making as a psychological process is influenced by 
many factors, including social status, lifestyle and work experience. And the process is directly related to the 
intellectual logic of intellectual aggression. Mistakes made during the decision-making process, however, often 
lead to serious consequences when the enterprise is at the highest level of management. Even the slightest 
mistake and neglect can lead to big problems. It should be noted that for poorly structured issues, the «wrong 
decision» is fuzzy. Thus, the existence of many criteria for alternative evaluation, the subjective nature of the 
evaluation of alternatives for some criteria, and the difficulty in obtaining the best information, to some extent, 
undermine the ability to select the optimum criterion of objectivity. 

In conclusion, I would like to note that in the modern era when new forms of farming have been estab-
lished, it is necessary to study the subject in light of the current problems and theoretical gaps in decision-
making processes in the Azerbaijani economy [1]. 

Литература/ References 

1.  Mübariz Sevdimalı oğlu Xəlilov «İnformatika» Dərslik Səhifə 43–56. 
2.  Bakı Biznes və Kooperasiya Kolleci.    

161 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
